---
permalink: home.html
title: home
layout: page
weight: 1
isfront: true
---

<b> [2017-07-27] New hardware support for Sound Blaster Play 2 USB
soundcard.  [see here](/news).  The (previously recommended) Cirrus
Logic Audio Card has been discontinued, so we recommend this
sound-card instead.

# Home

There is an [introductory video](https://youtu.be/2Fq05JlEKjw).

The Solo is an autonomous, high definition audio recorder for
unattended environmental monitoring. Protected in a weatherproof
enclosure, the Solo comprises a microphone, mini-computer and battery.
It is tailored for long-term, continuous recording, with data being
stored on a removable memory card.

[![what is this](/img/20160529_135006.jpg "boxed solo" ){:.some-css-class style="height: 250px; width:50% float: left;"}](/img/20160529_135006.jpg)
[![what is this](/img/20160529_135939.jpg "inside a solo" ){:.some-css-class style="height:250px; width:50%; float: right"}](/img/20160529_135939.jpg)

The Solo is straightforward to assemble, and inexpensive at around
£120 (including a 5-day battery, memory card and a really good
microphone). The cost without battery and memory card is £83 (for
comparison with commercial systems).  But there's a lot of flexibility
with components if you are picky. For example - with a car battery the
system will record for around 40 days (costing £167 pounds).

A typical deployment (the Solo:basic - pictured above) would be
powered by a USB battery bank which would run the system for five days
of permanent recording, 24 hours per day.  Alternatively, a 12kg car
battery runs the Solo for about 40 days, 24/7.

Recordings are split into manageable 10-minute long files which are
stored on the memory card, grouped into an intuitive folder-per-day
layout.  The recordings are in the .wav format which is compatible
with almost all audio software. Everything is configurable.

It is simple to prepare (flash) the memory card with the software to
run the Solo, and just as easy to harvest the audio data onto your
desktop/laptop using a card reader.  All software is free to download
and licensed openly.

Have a quick look through the tabs on this website, then jump to
the [Getting Started](documentation/getting-started.html) guide.
