---
layout: post
title:  SD card extension cable
date:   2016-06-23
categories: documentation

---


The photo (click to enlarge) shows an "extension cable" for your micro
SD card.  This means all the fiddling with the memory card is now much
further away from the delicate electronics.  It costs a few pounds
from online sellers in China.

[![measuring A+ power](/img/sdcard-extension-cable.jpg "extension cable" ){:.some-css-class style="width: 40%; border: 1px solid #e0e0e0; margin-left: 10px; float: right"}](/img/sdcard-extension-cable.jpg)

This would allow you to seal up the little box to keep the electronics
much safer.

This extender also changes the "format" of the card, from "micro SD"
to "SD", which I didn't really mean to do when I bought it, but I
realise it's a good thing.  I prefer the size of the SD-card (over the
SD micro size) when working outdoors.  Most of my micro SD cards were
supplied accompanied by one of the adapters (to make it into the
bigger SD size) - I show a few in the photo.

To use it: plug the extension into the Solo and then you don't go near
that end of it again.  All the activity happens at the nice big black
plastic SD-card holder on the other end, which can be 60cm away from
the electronics (cable lengths will vary).  You could velcro (blu-tac)
it to the side (or under the roof) of the big enclosure.

This is much more comfy to use in the field when you might have wet
slippery, dirty, muddy, cold, shaky hands.  And it's much better for
the electronics too - keeping them clean and dry and away from the
many dangers of human contact (water, dirt, shorting, static, physical
damage, etc).

If desired, you can now completely waterproof the "little box", and
never go into it again (except to change clock battery).  Add a pouch
of sillica-gel, and seal it up.  The box I normally recommend isn't
perfect in this situation, as it doesn't really fit well with the
extension plugged in.  Slight pressure on the lid is likely to
"unclick" the extension cable, so it's best to turn it to a different
orientation.  Or get a different "little box".


# Buying

Search for "SD micro extension cable".  I like to use [image
search](https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=sd+micro+extension+cable&tbm=isch).
Many of the listings (eBay for example) describe them as having a "TF"
(TransFlash).  This appears to be the same as SD-micro
[wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Secure_Digital#TransFlash),
but I can't be sure - <em>Caveat emptor</em>.

If you try to buy one with micro SD on both ends, it looks like the
remote end (the end NOT by the Solo) doesn't have a particularly good
plastic covering around the connector - certainly on the models I've
looked at - so be aware of that.

